Okay, so let's wrap up our
final session of this course,
on occurring high converting websites
by looking at the subject of
optimizing your site for conversion.
At the end of the last session I
started talking about testing and
introducing testing as a way of getting
design sign off and design approval.
But testing actually is a lot
more fundamental to that.
The idea of testing, and improving, and
iterating upon your website is
the lifeblood of conversion.
I've been doing this job for
26 years something like that,
which is depressing in itself.
And over all of that time the one thing
that I've learned above everything
else is that to maximize the conversion
rate on a website you need to test, right?
All of my knowledge, all of my experience
is meaningless in the face of user
behavior, users do weird things
that I don't understand and
I don't get even after all these years.
They continually surprised me on what
they like, and what they dislike,
what they respond to, what they don't
respond to, is always a surprise.
And the only way that you get to
real results is through testing.
So, that's what we're gonna look
at in this last section is,
how to kind of optimize
your site over time.
We're gonna look at why testing is so
important,
when and how to test, and reviewing
any more websites before we wrap up.
But basically,
we're gonna look at optimizing and
testing your website to go with.
So, why is testing so important,
why is this absolutely
fundamental to our success?
Well, for all our knowledge,
and expertise, and
years of experience, as I say,
that's only gonna take you so far.
You might produce the best design
that you possibly could and
follow all the advice that I've given so
far.
But it still won't be
as good as it could be,
if you're actually carry out some testing.
Testing has huge power.
For a start, it reduces costly mistakes.
If you design something and roll it out,
only to find that it's wrong only,
if you wasted the time and
money of designing it,
and rolling it, and developing it in the
first place, you're also wasting money,
then having to change it afterwards.
So, if you test early, you can catch
potential problems and mistakes you're
making in the design, and improve it, so
it converts better when you roll it out.
Secondly, it reduces time with those
time consuming debates you have about
aesthetics, as I was saying, in the last
session, that the amount of time we
waste debating about what color blue it
should be, well, we could just test it.
Now, I'm not saying we should
do what Google did and
test 41 shades of blue
to see which is best.
But I'm saying that the testing can
help break deadlocks in conversations,
where different people come to different
conclusions about what's working and
what's not.
And at the most basic level, testing will
dramatically improve your conversion rate.
And it really will make an enormous
difference, as I'll show you in a minute.
The other thing we're testing is not
only will it help with an issue orders,
but it can also help with repeat orders.
So, if you create a seamless easy
user experience on the website,
people will tend to use that website time
and time again, we are creatures of habit.
If we find something works,
we will just use it again and again,
is exactly the reason why sites like
Amazon and Booking.com succeed.
It's not because they've got the best user
experience or even the best conversion
optimization, although they both have
those, the second one in particular, is
because people know those sites, and it's
easier just to do what we already know.
So, if you get the first experience right,
and it's a pleasant experience, and
it's good, then people will
order from you again and again.
And the more times they order,
the more that they're likely to
stick with you over the long-term.
And then finally, of course a great
experience in a well-optimized website is
gonna encourage word of
mouth recommendation, right?
That's how a lot of sites become so
popular these days, is because they
provide a great experience, and that they
get shared from one person to another.
So, just to give you a sense
of how big a difference,
just a little bit of testing can do.
Let me tell you about one change that I
made that caused 6% increase in sales.
So, you remember, I talked about
an e-commerce site I worked on,
which sold frozen ready
meals to the over 80s.
So, this is an old audience.
And we created the website,
we had a checkout process.
And we were finding that a lot of users
were dropping out when it came to credit
card payments.
So, we were looking at the analytics.
And we saw that, when they hit that credit
card page, they were dropping out, and
they weren't finishing the order,
which proved very frustrating.
And we kinda hypothesized
different potential problems, and
one of the problems was that they
didn't feel the website was secure.
Cuz this is an elderly audience and
not necessarily particularly
comfortable with online transactions.
And even though obviously it
was a highly secured site, and
it had the little padlock
in the address bar, and
we even had a one of those
VerisSign secured logo.
But we concluded that actually
nobody had a clue what that meant,
that was our hypothesis.
So, our step one,
was identifying the problem page,
which turned out to be the payment page.
Step two, was then identifying
a potential problem item on the page,
which was our VeriSign secured logo.
So, what we did then is ran
a little bit of A/B testing.
So, we replaced the verify phone logo
with various combinations of icons and
text, that hopefully made it a little
bit more secure, more obvious.
And so, we then ran that as an A/B test.
And we saw a 6% increase in
conversions by introducing the text
you see on the right-hand side
of the screen there, right?
Just by doing a little bit of A/B testing,
wasn't an expensive,
wasn't time consuming, and
yet it made a big difference.
Now that's a drop in the ocean
compared to my friend Jared Spool,
I don't know whether you
know of Jared Spool, but
he's a brilliant expert in
user experience design.
And he tells the story
of one of his clients,
where they changed a particular
form field button.
And by changing the one button,
they increased sales by 300 million.
And they didn't do that,
because Jared Spool is the genius,
although I like to think he is, I like to
hang out with genius or really think I do.
He just a magic guess,
it was just done through systematic
testing of what he was doing.
So, testing makes a huge difference,
it saves you time, it saves you money.
It saves your sanity, if you're the one
responsible for the design, and
it improves the conversion rate.
So, the question then fairly
obviously becomes what to test?
There is a lot of different things
that you can test on a website and
where you begin is not always obvious.
There are several things I like to start
with, one I've already talked about,
which is testing brand keywords.
So, we're saying we want the design
to be trustworthy, friendly,
that kinda thing, so we can test those.
We can also test our visual hierarchy,
right?
Are people seeing the content
that we want them to see?
That's something else that
we can definitely test.
We can test our calls to action, are
people clicking on the calls to action,
are they compelling,
are they being noticed, etc?
And then finally,
we can test the content itself.
Is content compelling,
does it communicate what we want it to,
is it as optimized and
as good as it could be?
So, those are the kinds of
things that we're testing.
The next question then becomes, well, when
and how do we go about testing, cuz there
are lots of different phases in a project,
a lot of different opportunities to test.
And when we talk about A/B testing, like
I was talking about with Jared Spool and
also on the the frozen
ready meals website,
those were both existing websites
that were already running.
So, you could do A/B testing.
But in actual fact you're
better off testing early,
the earlier you test,
these are estimate changes, right?
If you're just testing a wire frame,
then you can change that easily.
If you've waited until you've
built half the website and
run a bit of usability testing at the end,
because you feel like you should do,
then it's really expensive and
difficult to make changes.
And so, you tend not to bother and see
your website goes live being suboptimal.
So, really there are lots
of opportunities to test.
And I'm not somebody who is
into heavy duty testing, right?
For me it's all about
return on investment.
You wanna put the minimal effort in for
the maximum results.
So, I'm not talking about usability labs,
or two-way mirrors, or
stuff that takes weeks.
I know that most of you and me myself
don't ever have budget set aside for
testing, and
the client is reluctant to do it,
cuz they're worried it
slow up the project.
So, everything that I'm gonna
propose is really lightweight,
easy stuff that anybody can do with
no money and very little time.
So, first of all, before you begin,
before you even start on a project,
you can actually do testing.
Now, I know that sounds weird,
but bear with me it is possible.
The first thing you can do is usability
testing on your existing site or
on your competitors site.
I love competitor's websites, right?
Because they're effectively
a free prototype that
they've built kindly for you.
So, you can rip it apart,
find all the problems,
find what works, find what doesn't,
and copy what you need to and
improve what they've done wrong,
it's great.
So, just spending a little
bit of time running two or
three users through using a site like
that, your various competitors sites,
getting them to complete key tasks,
really doesn't need to take long.
And you've got a couple
of ways you can do that.
You can either do what's called
facilitated usability testing,
where you basically arrange
a Zoom call with them, right?
And you jump on a call, and you say,
show me how to do dot, dot, dot,
how would you contact them more,
how would you buy this thing, or
whatever their primary call to action is,
right?
Just watch them do it.
There's no magic to it.
You don't have to use fancy words.
Yes, you can get very sophisticated
with usability testing.
But even just having
a chat with some users,
getting them to complete some key tasks,
you'll learn valuable stuff for that.
If you wanna test a few more people and
you're really short on time,
then you can use what's called
unfacilitated usability testing, where you
use a tool, like look back or another
one that I use quite a lot is maze.com.
And on those tools, you go in,
you write out what the task is, right?
So, how would you contact
this organization, right?
And put in the URL, and
then put in the page,
where they complete the task,
where the task is considered complete.
And then what the tool will
do is give you a unique URL,
you can pass out to people on social
media, email or wherever else.
And they can go to the URL, follow
the instructions and complete the task.
And then you'll get videos back, where you
can watch them try and do these things.
Now, what you do is ask them to speak
out loud, while they're doing it.
So, they can express their frustrations
and difficulties that they're having, but
it's that simple.
And often,
if you've got a big mailing list or
a lot of people on the social media
channel, you can get results in a hour.
And if you're in a real hurry, and
you've got a little bit money to spend,
they'll even recruit people for
you to complete the tasks on your behalf,
sometimes as little as $1 or $2 per user,
though the more complex the task is,
the more that goes up.
So, really to do that kind of
initial testing just to kind
of let you know where you're at is super,
super easy.
Also, if it's your own site that
you're testing, you can run things,
like session recorders.
If you've ever come across
a talk on Microsoft Clarity,
where you might have heard of Hotjar
a lot of us have heard of Hotjar,
which you get session recordings
of people moving around the site.
Well, there's a free version
called Microsoft Clarity,
which is Microsoft trying to get
in on the Google analytics game.
And actually, it's a great little tool,
where it will record users move around
the site, show where they're
getting angry or frustrated,
because they repeatedly clicking or
clicking on things aren't clickable.
You can learn loads from just
looking at a few of those videos.
So, that kind of upfront testing,
great starting point, highly encourage it.
The other thing that I often do up front
is something called an exit intent survey.
So, we're only showing this as the user
is going to leave the website.
So, it really only works on mobile,
because as the cursor moves off
the screen, it triggers not.
It only works on desktop,
because it needs to track the user's
cursor going off the screen.
But as the user's cursor
goes off the screen, and
they look like they're about to abandon
the site, then you just display a survey.
I don't like interrupting people who might
be in the middle of doing a task right?
So, we try and
get them just as they're leaving.
And I asked them one simple question,
before you go today we
would love to know why you
decided not to sign up or
buy, whatever the task is?
That's it, that's all I'm asking them, and
I give them a multi choice list of things
that I think are common objections or
problems.
But then I allow them to add more,
if they want to.
And that single test tells you so,
so much, because you then know,
well, okay, price is the problem, right?
That's why people aren't buying,
cuz the price is too high, okay, so
what do we do about that?
We need to handle that objection.
We might reduce the price, or
we might reprime them, like with
the ConvertKit example, by focusing on
the features, or we might make it so
compelling that is worth paying
the extra money, whatever it be.
And just from that one question,
you can begin to really
build up a picture of what you
should be focusing on the website.
So, that's what I do before I even start.
Then I obviously start doing some
wireframing typically, just kinda getting
the structure in the field, normally
grayscale wireframes, just laying out some
of the content and how I want the page
to flow and that kinda thing.
And again, you've got some
opportunities to test here.
Even with something like card sorting, so
even when I'm just looking at
the information architecture.
They've renamed themselves now, I don't
think there are oxShops anymore, but
you can still type in oxshops.com.
And you get to a great website,
where essentially,
you can run card sorting tests,
you can get people to organize information
in ways that make sense to them.
This is really good for
deciding on e-commerce categories, right?
How should the products be categorized,
or pout blog post categories will be
another example, or navigation,
and that kinda thing.
You can create the whole information
architecture through card sorting
exercises.
But you could also, then test the results
of that, you can create a tree structure.
And you can ask people to navigate
those trees to find a particular page.
So, do they find easily
the particular page there after?
So, even at the information architecture
stage, you can start testing it,
start playing around it.
And again,
you can get results in a few minutes.
You don't have to do huge study
with the hundreds of people,
even half a dozen people,
you'll begin to see insights.
And again, you can do this on facilitated,
in other words,
you don't need to sit with people,
while they're doing it.
You send out a link,
then you'll get data back.
If you want you can do some facilitated
remote testing on your wireframes,
where you get people to
click through them, and
navigate around them,
and see how they get on.
But if you don't have time, that's fine.
Don't do that, right?
Do what you can, when you can.
But doing some testing is better
than doing no testing at all,
in terms of improving things.